Bank's recession warning matters to everyone

We don't need the Bank of England to tell us times are hard.

Even before its recession warning on Thursday, the typical person's finances were already stretched as prices, particularly for food and fuel, soared.

Half of households cut back on energy usage over the spring, while a third were curbing their spending on food and other staples. Our living standards were going into reverse, on course to do so by the greatest degree since the 1950s.

What the Bank underlined yesterday, though, was how much worse things are going to get - and for much longer than previously thought, with the warning that activity across the UK economy is set to go into reverse until the end of 2023.

The factors behind that have been both largely beyond its control and unpredictable.

Bank defends rate hike ahead of looming recession
What is a recession and how could it affect me?
Front and centre are those energy bills. By next February, the domestic price cap could be twice what it is right now - and that is largely due to the fallout from the war in Ukraine.

We may not source much gas (less than 5% of our supply) from Russia, but that country restricting the amount of gas it's pumping to Europe has caused alarm and so global wholesale prices are spiking once again.

Those energy bills directly account for about half of the increase in our living costs, some of the rest reflects higher global food prices, which is also a knock on effect of war.

It's this external source of inflation which makes it hard for the Bank of England to get a grip on the problem. Its main tool - raising interest rates - works by engineering a slowdown, leaving borrowers with less money to spend so that businesses have less scope to raise prices.

That's not only less effective when the key source of inflation is rising global costs rather than strong demand, but also means that interest rates add to the pain.

Crisis will burn itself out
How much can the government help? There's already billions of pounds of public money being channelled to households but even with the extra pledges made by those vying to be the next prime minister, that won't compensate for the rise in bills we're facing.

Rishi Sunak's promised cut to VAT on energy bills will only plug part of the increase in the price cap. Liz Truss's tax cuts are likely to be too late to avert recession - and some economists warn, could actually prolong the era of heightened inflation - and so possibly higher interest rates - by allowing for extra spending on non-essentials.

What taxes would Liz Truss and Rishi Sunak cut?
As for the impact on jobs, in the short term, the main challenge for businesses remains filling vacancies in the face of staff shortages. As the squeeze continues, their hiring plans and their ability to retain staff may change.

The Bank of England does expect unemployment to rise, but gradually. By its reckoning, 800,000 people could lose their jobs over the next couple of years.

If we've learnt anything over the last few years, it's that the economic landscape can be widely unpredictable.